.TH DRACO 1 "2026-05-08" "DRACO 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
draco \- Dotfile & Runtime Archive and Configuration Orchestrator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B draco
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fICOMMAND\fR] [\fIARG\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B DRACO
(Dotfile & Runtime Archive and Configuration Orchestrator) is a portable,
encrypted backup system for Linux workstations. It backs up dotfiles,
shell configurations, SSH and GPG keys, desktop environment
personalizations (KDE and GNOME), installed software manifests, and
generates a reinstall script to reproduce the entire software environment
on a new machine.

DRACO is designed for power users who reinstall Linux frequently, switch
between machines, or want a reproducible workstation state. It is
\fBnot\fR a general-purpose data backup tool: it explicitly excludes
user data directories (Downloads, Documents, etc.) and focuses solely on
configurations and software metadata.

DRACO can be launched with a full-color Terminal User Interface (TUI) or
driven entirely from the command line, making it suitable for both
interactive use and automation via systemd user timers or cron jobs.

.SS Supported Distributions
.IP \(bu 4
Fedora 42 and later
.IP \(bu 4
Debian 12 (Bookworm) and later
.IP \(bu 4
Ubuntu 24.04 LTS and later (and derivatives: Kubuntu, Xubuntu, Pop!_OS, etc.)
.IP \(bu 4
Arch Linux and derivatives (Manjaro, EndeavourOS, Garuda)

.SS Supported Desktop Environments
.IP \(bu 4
KDE Plasma (full support: Konsole profiles, Spaceship prompt, color schemes,
Plasma themes, Aurorae decorations, global shortcuts)
.IP \(bu 4
GNOME (dconf settings export/import, extensions, GTK themes)
.IP \(bu 4
Other DEs: dotfiles and SSH/GPG backed up; DE-specific settings skipped

.SS Encryption
All backups are encrypted with
.B AES-256-CBC
using OpenSSL with PBKDF2 key derivation (600,000 iterations). This
provides strong protection for sensitive files such as SSH private keys
and GPG keyrings. The password is never stored on disk.

.SS Compression
Archives are compressed with
.B zstd
(level 6 by default) before encryption. If zstd is unavailable, DRACO
falls back to gzip automatically.

.SS Deduplication
After creating a new backup, DRACO computes a SHA-256 hash of the
encrypted archive and compares it to the previous backup. If the hashes
match (no changes detected), the new archive is discarded and a symlink
to the previous one is created, saving disk space without losing the
version history entry.

.SS Known Limitations
.IP \(bu 4
Monitor and display configuration (resolution, arrangement, DPI) is
\fBexcluded\fR from restore to avoid conflicts when restoring to a
different hardware setup.
.IP \(bu 4
KDE Activities are not backed up.
.IP \(bu 4
Flatpak configuration is partially backed up (only overrides, not
per-application data).
.IP \(bu 4
Wayland-specific input remapping (libinput gestures outside DE) may not
be fully captured.
.IP \(bu 4
The reinstall script installs packages by name; packages that have been
renamed or removed from repositories since the backup will fail silently
(with \fB|| true\fR).
.IP \(bu 4
npm, pip, and snap package lists are included as best-effort only.

.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B backup
Run a backup immediately. DRACO detects the current distro and desktop
environment, collects dotfiles and configuration paths, exports KDE or
GNOME settings, generates a software manifest and reinstall script, then
creates a single encrypted compressed archive. If the resulting archive
is identical (SHA-256) to the previous backup, it is replaced with a
symlink (deduplication). Retention policy is applied after each backup.

.TP
.B restore [\fIBACKUP_ID\fR]
Restore a backup. If
.I BACKUP_ID
is omitted, an interactive selection menu is displayed. DRACO checks
whether the backup was created on a different desktop environment than
the current one. If a mismatch is detected (e.g. backup from KDE,
restoring on GNOME), a prominent warning is shown and DE-specific
settings are skipped. All other configs are restored normally.
Existing files are moved to a timestamped pre-restore backup directory
before being overwritten.

.TP
.B list
List all available backups with their ID, size, and creation date.
Also displays the total storage used by all backups.

.TP
.B log [\fIBACKUP_ID\fR]
Show the log for a specific backup. The log includes the list of backed-up
paths, the distro and DE at backup time, and a diff summary vs the
previous backup. If
.I BACKUP_ID
is omitted, the log for the most recent backup is shown.

.TP
.B delete \fIBACKUP_ID\fR
Delete a specific backup and its associated metadata. Prompts for
confirmation before deleting. Does not delete symlinked (deduplicated)
targets unless explicitly specified. Use
.B draco list
to obtain valid backup IDs.

.TP
.B config
Launch the interactive configuration wizard in CLI mode. Allows setting
the backup destination directory, compression level, retention policy,
TUI theme, and other options. Settings are saved to the DRACO config
file.

.TP
.B schedule [\fISUBCOMMAND\fR]
Manage the automatic backup schedule.

.RS
.TP
.B schedule install
Interactive installer for automatic scheduling. Detects available methods
(systemd user timer, cron) and prompts for frequency (hourly, daily,
weekly, monthly) and time. Saves the schedule choice to the config file.

.TP
.B schedule remove
Remove the installed automatic backup schedule (both systemd and cron
entries, if present).

.TP
.B schedule status
Show the current scheduling status, next run time (if systemd), and the
cron expression (if cron).
.RE

.TP
.B status
Show a summary of the current DRACO configuration: backup directory,
last backup ID, total storage used, detected DE, schedule type, retention
policy, and active TUI theme.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fIFILE\fR
Use an alternate configuration file instead of the default
.IR ~/.config/draco/draco.conf .

.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-password " " \fIPASSWORD\fR
Provide the encryption password on the command line. This is convenient
for scripting but exposes the password in the process list. Prefer the
.B DRACO_PASSWORD
environment variable for automated use.

.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress all output except errors. Suitable for cron and systemd service
use.

.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose/debug output. Logs every file path considered, skipped,
or included.

.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable color output. Useful when piping output or using DRACO in
environments without color support.

.TP
.B \-\-tui
Force TUI mode even when a command is specified. Ignored: TUI mode is
the default when no command is given.

.TP
.B \-\-version
Print DRACO version and exit.

.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show a brief usage summary and exit.

.SH CONFIGURATION
DRACO reads its configuration from
.B ~/.config/draco/draco.conf
(or the path in the
.B DRACO_CONFIG
environment variable). The file uses a simple
.B KEY=VALUE
format and is created automatically on first run or via
.BR "draco config" .

.SS Configuration Keys
.TP
.B DRACO_BACKUP_DIR
Absolute path to the backup destination directory. Required. DRACO
will not run a backup until this is set.

.TP
.B DRACO_ENCRYPTION_ALGO
OpenSSL cipher to use. Default:
.BR aes-256-cbc .
Do not change unless you have a specific reason.

.TP
.B DRACO_COMPRESSION
Compression algorithm. One of:
.BR zstd " (default), " gzip ", " bzip2 ", " xz .

.TP
.B DRACO_COMPRESSION_LEVEL
Compression level (1-19 for zstd, 1-9 for gzip/bzip2/xz). Default: 6.

.TP
.B DRACO_RETENTION_POLICY
Retention policy. One of:
.BR all " (keep everything), " daily ", " weekly ", " monthly ", " smart .
Default:
.BR all .

.TP
.B DRACO_RETENTION_KEEP_DAILY
Number of daily backups to keep (used by
.B daily
and
.B smart
policies). Default: 7.

.TP
.B DRACO_RETENTION_KEEP_WEEKLY
Number of weekly backups to keep. Default: 4.

.TP
.B DRACO_RETENTION_KEEP_MONTHLY
Number of monthly backups to keep. Default: 12.

.TP
.B DRACO_RETENTION_KEEP_YEARLY
Number of yearly backups to keep (smart policy only). Default: 3.

.TP
.B DRACO_SCHEDULE_TYPE
Scheduling backend: one of
.BR systemd ", " cron ", " none .

.TP
.B DRACO_SCHEDULE_FREQ
Backup frequency:
.BR hourly ", " daily ", " weekly ", " monthly .

.TP
.B DRACO_SCHEDULE_TIME
Time of day for non-hourly schedules, in HH:MM format. Default:
.BR 02:00 .

.TP
.B DRACO_TUI_THEME
TUI color theme. One of:
.BR ghost ", " blood ", " acid ", " matrix ", " void .

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DRACO_PASSWORD
Encryption password. When set, DRACO will not prompt for a password.
Recommended for automated/scheduled backups. Set in
.B ~/.config/environment.d/draco.conf
for systemd user services, or at the top of the crontab for cron jobs.

.TP
.B DRACO_CONFIG
Override the config file path.

.TP
.B DRACO_BACKUP_DIR
Override the backup directory (highest priority, overrides config file).

.TP
.B DRACO_LOG_LEVEL
Log verbosity: 0=DEBUG, 1=INFO (default), 2=WARN, 3=ERROR.

.TP
.B DRACO_NO_COLOR
Set to
.B 1
to disable color output (same as
.BR \-\-no\-color ).

.TP
.B XDG_SESSION_DESKTOP / DESKTOP_SESSION
Used by DRACO to detect the running desktop environment.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/draco/draco.conf
Main configuration file.

.TP
.I ~/.local/share/draco/logs/
Session log files (one per DRACO invocation).

.TP
.I $DRACO_BACKUP_DIR/draco-YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS.tar.zst.enc
Encrypted backup archives. Symlinks indicate deduplicated backups.

.TP
.I $DRACO_BACKUP_DIR/.meta/YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS.meta
Metadata file for each backup (hash, distro, DE, size, date).

.TP
.I $DRACO_BACKUP_DIR/.meta/YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS.log
Human-readable log for each backup (paths backed up, diff vs previous).

.TP
.I ~/.config/systemd/user/draco-backup.service
.I ~/.config/systemd/user/draco-backup.timer
Systemd user units (created by
.BR "draco schedule install" ).

.SH TUI THEMES
DRACO's TUI is implemented in native bash with ANSI 256-color output
(color range 16-255 only; range 0-15 is avoided as it is remapped by
some terminals such as KDE Konsole). whiptail/dialog is used only for
text input dialogs. Five themes are available:

.TP
.B ghost
White on near-black (fg=255, bg=232).

.TP
.B blood
Red on near-black (fg=196, bg=232).

.TP
.B acid
Yellow on near-black (fg=226, bg=232).

.TP
.B matrix
Green on near-black (fg=46, bg=232).

.TP
.B void
Cyan on near-black (fg=51, bg=232).

.SH RETENTION POLICIES
.TP
.B all
All backups are kept. No automatic deletion. Disk usage grows
indefinitely.

.TP
.B daily
Keep the last
.B DRACO_RETENTION_KEEP_DAILY
backups, delete the rest.

.TP
.B weekly
Keep the last
.B DRACO_RETENTION_KEEP_WEEKLY
backups.

.TP
.B monthly
Keep the last
.B DRACO_RETENTION_KEEP_MONTHLY
backups.

.TP
.B smart
Keep: last N daily, last one per week for N weeks, last one per month
for N months, last one per year for N years. The most space-efficient
policy for long-term use.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Run a one-shot backup:
.B draco backup

.TP
Restore the most recent backup interactively:
.B draco restore

.TP
Restore a specific backup:
.B draco restore 20260508-143022

.TP
List all backups:
.B draco list

.TP
View the log for the last backup:
.B draco log

.TP
View the log for a specific backup:
.B draco log 20260508-143022

.TP
Delete a specific backup:
.B draco delete 20260101-120000

.TP
Install daily automatic backup at 02:00 via systemd:
.B draco schedule install

.TP
Run with password from environment (no prompt):
.B DRACO_PASSWORD=secret draco backup --quiet

.TP
Use an alternate config file:
.B draco --config /mnt/usb/draco.conf backup

.SH SECURITY NOTES
SSH private keys, GPG keyrings, and other sensitive files are included
in the backup. The encryption password is the only protection for these
files. Use a strong password (minimum 12 characters recommended).

Never store the password in the config file
.RI ( ~/.config/draco/draco.conf ).
Use the
.B DRACO_PASSWORD
environment variable or enter it interactively.

For systemd user timer automated backups, store the password in
.I ~/.config/environment.d/draco.conf
with mode 600:

.RS
.nf
DRACO_PASSWORD=your_strong_password
.fi
.RE

The backup directory should have restrictive permissions (700) to
prevent other users from accessing encrypted archives.

.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
Required (present in virtually all Linux distributions):
.BR bash " (4.0+), " tar ", " openssl ", " sha256sum ", " find ", " grep ", " sed ", " awk ", " date

.TP
Optional but strongly recommended:
.BR zstd " (compression), " whiptail " or " dialog " (input dialogs only — TUI is native bash)"

.TP
Package detection (used only if present):
.BR dnf ", " apt ", " pacman ", " zypper ", " flatpak ", " snap ", " pip3 ", " npm

.SH AUTHOR
DRACO was designed and implemented as a portable Linux workstation
backup solution. Licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.

.SH LICENSE
GNU General Public License version 3.
.br
See
.I LICENSE
file or
.UR https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html
.UE .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tar (1),
.BR openssl (1),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR crontab (5),
.BR dconf (1)
